---
layout: post
title: "Read assembly for great good"
date: 2014-09-19 15:00:00
categories: compilers
---

Some of my work lately has necessitated inspecting the generated assembly for code I've written.
For those unfamiliar with the inner workings of compilers, they turn things like C code:

{% highlight c %}
void csr_matvec(int m, int *ptr, int *node, double *val,
                double *x, double *y)
{
  int i, j, k;
  double z;

  for (i = 0; i < m; i++) {
    z = 0.0;

    for (k = ptr[i]; k < ptr[i + 1]; k++) {
      j = node[k];
      z += val[k] * x[j];
    }

    y[i] = z;
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

into assembly code, which looks like this:

{% highlight asm %}
  movl -8(%rbp), %eax
  cltq
  leaq 0(,%rax,4), %rdx
  movq -56(%rbp), %rax
  addq %rdx, %rax
  movl (%rax), %eax
  movl %eax, -20(%rbp)
  movl -8(%rbp), %eax
  cltq
  leaq 0(,%rax,8), %rdx
  movq -64(%rbp), %rax
  addq %rdx, %rax
  movsd (%rax), %xmm1
  movl -20(%rbp), %eax
  cltq
  leaq 0(,%rax,8), %rdx
  movq -72(%rbp), %rax
  addq %rdx, %rax
  movsd (%rax), %xmm0
  mulsd %xmm1, %xmm0
  movsd -16(%rbp), %xmm1
  addsd %xmm1, %xmm0
  movsd %xmm0, -16(%rbp)
  addl $1, -8(%rbp)
{% endhighlight %}

Assembly code is about one step above the raw binary code that your processor understands.
The variables `%rax`, `%rdx`, and so forth are the processor's general purpose registers, which store integers or pointers; the variables `%xmm0`, `%xmm1`, ... are the floating point registers.
I haven't shown all the assembly code for the C function above, as it's quite long; you can copy the function above into a file and run

`gcc -S filename.c`

to get the raw assembly code output.


## Why the hell would you do that

Examining the assembly output can be very helpful in determining what kinds of optimizations are being used in performance-sensitive code.
For example, if you wanted to check whether a loop had been unrolled, if a function had been inlined, or if a floating point operation were making optimal use of SIMD registers, you would need to look at the generated assembly code.
Equally useful is knowing when that would-be optimization that mangles your code beyond readability isn't actually doing anything.

As useful as the exercise may be, understanding the correspondence between the original C code and the generated assembly code can be quite difficult.
When we use C or any other high-level programming language, we have the illusion of being able to use an arbitrary number of variables, when in fact there are only a finite number of CPU registers.
Internally, the compiler has to [allocate variables to registers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Register_allocation) by analyzing which variables are both in use at the same time.
If more variables are in use at once than the number of registers your CPU has, some of them have to be spilled to RAM temporarily, then accessed later when they're needed again.

In order to understand what your code compiles down to, you need to know how the compiler allocated registers to each of the variables you used.
As the assembly output above shows, this mapping isn't recorded anywhere in the output and you may have to figure it out yourself.
Knowing the calling convention for x86-64 can be of help in decoding which register corresponds to which variable at a given point in time.
For example, the arguments to a function are put in registers `%rdi`, `%rsi`, `%rdx`, `%rcx`, `%r8` and `%r9` in that order, and the return value is left in `%rax`.
If you can figure out which arguments go in which registers at the entry point to a function, you can follow them through the rest of the program logic by dead reckoning.


## How the hell do you do that

Luckily, you can get the compiler to annotate the assembly code to help you out.
There are a few different ways to achieve the same thing.

### objdump
Using GCC, compile with `-g` to generate debug symbols:

`gcc -g -O2 -c csr.c`

The program `objdump` displays information about object files; by invoking it on the object file `csr.o` that we just created together with the `-S` option, we can see the assembly code interspersed with the original source code:

{% highlight objdump-nasm %}
  for (i = 0; i < m; i++) {
    z = 0.0;
  22:	66 0f 28 ca          	movapd xmm1,xmm2
  26:	41 29 c2             	sub    r10d,eax
  29:	48 8d 1c 82          	lea    rbx,[rdx+rax*4]
  2d:	4c 8d 1c c1          	lea    r11,[rcx+rax*8]
  31:	4a 8d 2c 95 04 00 00 	lea    rbp,[r10*4+0x4]
  38:	00 

    for (k = ptr[i]; k < ptr[i + 1]; k++) {
  39:	31 c0                	xor    eax,eax
  3b:	0f 1f 44 00 00       	nop    DWORD PTR [rax+rax*1+0x0]
      j = node[k];
      z += val[k] * x[j];
  40:	4c 63 14 03          	movsxd r10,DWORD PTR [rbx+rax*1]
  44:	f2 41 0f 10 04 43    	movsd  xmm0,QWORD PTR [r11+rax*2]
  4a:	48 83 c0 04          	add    rax,0x4
{% endhighlight %}

This is again just a snippet of the full output, which is much too long.
The `-l` flag can be used instead to just get line number output instead of the original source code.


### IR
Most compilers don't directly translate your code to the assembly language of your processor.
Instead, they first translate your code into an intermediate representation (IR), something like a portable assebly.
The IR is then translated into the machine-dependent assembly.

The [LLVM](http://www.llvm.org) compiler infrastructure, which underlies the `clang` C/C++/Ojbective-C compilers, has a fairly easy-to-read intermediate representation.
You can see the IR for the code you write by calling clang like so:

`clang -S -emit-llvm csr.c`.

Likewise, GCC can give you a dump of all its intermediate stages with

`gcc -S csr.c -fdump-tree-all-graph`.

This gives you a whole mess of files for every stage of compilation -- the original code, the GIMPLE IR, the control-flow graph, and so forth.

A snippet of LLVM IR for the matrix-vector multiply code above looks like this:

{% highlight llvm %}

for.body4:                                        ; preds = %for.cond1
  %9 = load i32* %k, align 4
  %10 = load i32** %node.addr, align 4
  %arrayidx5 = getelementptr inbounds i32* %10, i32 %9
  %11 = load i32* %arrayidx5, align 4
  store i32 %11, i32* %j, align 4
  %12 = load i32* %k, align 4
  %13 = load double** %val.addr, align 4
  %arrayidx6 = getelementptr inbounds double* %13, i32 %12
  %14 = load double* %arrayidx6, align 4
  %15 = load i32* %j, align 4
  %16 = load double** %x.addr, align 4
  %arrayidx7 = getelementptr inbounds double* %16, i32 %15
  %17 = load double* %arrayidx7, align 4
  %mul = fmul double %14, %17
  %18 = load double* %z, align 8
  %add8 = fadd double %18, %mul
  store double %add8, double* %z, align 8
  br label %for.inc

{% endhighlight %}

Variable names in LLVM IR are preceded by a `%`.
Most of the variables are temporaries, and these are just named with a number according to the order in which they were assigned.
Some of the original variable names (`z`, `k`, `node`, etc.) are preserved in the IR.
We get to see a translation of our source code into something low-level enough to reveal information about individual loads, stores or arithmetic operations, but before register allocation has removed any trace of which assembly values came from which C variables.


### cparser
While GCC and clang are both deservedly well-known, I recently stumbled across the compiler backend library [libfirm](http://pp.ipd.kit.edu/firm) and its C frontend, cparser; libfirm/cparser are roughly analogous to LLVM/clang.
Unlike LLVM, however, libfirm is written entirely in C, so the compilation times are much more manageable.
All generated assembly code from cparser is annotated with its origin in the C source code.
For example, here's the output of cparser for the interior loop of  the C function:

{% highlight asm %}
movslq %eax, %r15           /* amd64_Movs T[359:53]  */
movslq (%rdx,%r15,4), %r14  /* amd64_Movs T[361:55] csr.c:10:21 */
movsd (%r8,%r14,8), %xmm1   /* amd64_xMovs T[368:62] csr.c:11:28 */
mulsd (%rcx,%r15,8), %xmm1  /* amd64_xMuls T[378:72] csr.c:11:25 */
addsd %xmm1, %xmm0          /* amd64_xAdds T[380:74] csr.c:11:15 */
leal 1(%rax), %eax          /* amd64_Lea T[385:79] csr.c:9:43 */
{% endhighlight %}

Beyond the libfirm/cparser website, I've seen very little information about it elsewhere on the internet.
While it appears to be more of an academic project than an industrial-strength compiler like clang, I've been pretty impressed with the results for 32-bit x86 and it has a well-documented graph-based intermediate representation.
Hopefully it will get the attention it deserves.