---
layout: post
title: "Things I've had to fix in Nix"
date: 2015-08-29 12:29:11
categories: linux
---

I've recently started using the new and rather interesting [NixOS](http://www.nixos.org) linux distribution.
NixOS is build around the nix package manager, which makes dependency hell much less hellish.
I won't even try to describe how it works in this short space; rather, I refer you to the NixOS website and documentation.

Before using NixOS, I had used various versions of Ubuntu, Linux Mint, Debian and most recently Arch.
Each of these had some deal-breaker of a problem at some point, usually related to package management.
By contrast, NixOS has lots of minor annoyances at first, but these are easily fixed.
I've been able to find solutions to most of these problems with a web search and, failing that, the people in the #nixos IRC channel on freenode are saints.

In case others run into some of the same issues that I have, here are some quick fixes I've had to make in NixOS.


## System configuration

#### kmscon
I like working from the command-line only, largely to keep me from browsing [the internet](www.cuteoverload.com) instead of working.
This experience can actually be made very pleasant by using [kmscon](http://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/kmscon/), a user-space virtual terminal which can replace the Linux kernel console.
With kmscon, you can have a 256-color terminal and use true-type fonts in console mode.
You can tell systemd to run kmscon instead of `getty` on boot by following the instructions [here](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/KMSCON).
kmscon uses either command-line arguments or the file `/etc/kmscon/kmscon.conf` to determine its behavior (e.g. font choice and size, hardware rendering, etc.) when invoked normally.

In NixOS, replacing getty with kmscon is instead done through a declaration in `configuration.nix`:

`services.kmscon.enable = true;`

Extra options for kmscon that would normally be passed through command-line arguments or in kmscon.conf are instead included in the nix configuration, for example

`services.kmscon.extraConfig = ''font-name=Source Code Pro''`.


#### brightness
On my old system, I had to jump through some hoops to be able to set my laptop's screen brightness from terminal mode.
In NixOS this can be done easily by enabling the program `light` by adding
  `programs.light.enable = true;`
to the nix configuration.
You can then set the screen brightness at the terminal with `light -S 10.0`.


#### power management
In order to conserve battery life, your computer can scale down the CPU frequency when it's not under load.
This behavior can be enabled by adding

`powermanagement = { enable = true;  cpuFreqGovernor = "ondemand"; };`

to the nix configuration.


#### powertop
To get more information about power consumption, install the `powertop` utility and run it with

  `powertop --html=<destination>`

This generates a handy report in HTML format, which will show your machine's power usage and a few commands you can run to enable power management for various devices.
To use powertop, you may have to enable the `msr` kernel module.
For example, when I ran powertop on my laptop, I found that the audio device was on all the time; by enabling power management, it can be put to sleep when idle, saving on battery usage.

In NixOS, these commands can be saved in your `configuration.nix` under the `boot.extraModprobeConfig` argument; for example, in my nix config I have

`boot.extraModprobeConfig = "options snd_hda_intel power_save=1";`

to enable power saving for my audio card.


## Desktop

#### booting to terminal
So far as I know, doing an X-less boot and then invoking `startx` or `xinit` later is not possible.
One can disable auto-starting X.
In order to start the display manager, you have to then run

`systemctl start display-manager`

which requires privileges.
In principle, you could configure things so that running `systemctl` does not require privileges, but that's quite dangerous.

#### StumpWM and SBCL
I'm using [Stump](https://stumpwm.github.io/), a tiling window manager written in Common Lisp.
One of the better implementations of the Common Lisp languages is [SBCL](http://www.sbcl.org/); unfortunately, SBCL and Stump don't play well together in Nix at present. Trying to run an installed SBCL at the terminal or through Emacs's SLIME package while using Stump immediately sends you to the SBCL debugger with some mysterious error.
This appears to be a versioning issue.

Nix's central Hydra server builds Stump by running an instance of sbcl-1.2.5, loading and executing Stump, then saving that lisp image and distributing it to you.
When your machine runs this copy of the lisp image in order to start the window manager, an environment variable `SBCL_HOME` is set to the directory containing sbcl-1.2.5.

However, if you ask Nix to install SBCL in the user's environment, you get sbcl-1.2.14 or an even later version.
Attempting to run sbcl-1.2.14 throws an error, because it looks in `SBCL_HOME` and finds the incompatible 1.2.5 lisp runtime.
You can fix this within a terminal session by setting `SBCL_HOME` to be empty,
but I haven't yet found a way to get SLIME working with SBCL.
Alternatively, one could circumvent the issue by using a different CL implementation (CCL, ECL, etc.) for development than the implementation used to build Stump.



## Building libraries

#### compilers
Installing `clang-<version>` doesn't adjust your include or library search paths to find the C++ standard library and headers.
Instead, the right package is `clang-wrapper-<version>`.

On my system, the software sources for the root user point to a stable version of `nixpkgs`, while my user account points to the master branch of the git repo for the latest versions.
If you install a newer version of the C/C++ compiler in a user account, the `cc` and `c++` executables will refer to the older versions installed by root.
Consequently, if you do install software from source you'll need to explicitly set the right compiler.



#### link flags
Libraries that the user installs go in `/home/<user>/.nix-profile/lib`, and yet this directory isn't included in `LD_LIBRARY_PATH`.
When building other libraries from source, the linker won't find libraries installed by nix without adding the appropriate `-L` flag at link-time.
In my case, I was using CMake, so I had to set `CMAKE_SHARED_LINKER_FLAGS`.


#### ad-hoc environments
A better way of doing that is creating a nix-expression which tracks the dependencies needed to build the source in question.
You can then invoke `nix-shell`: this command fetches any missing dependencies and sets environment variables so that those dependencies can be found easily.
Within this environment, building the package should work.
The nix shell that you enter is temporary; that way, you can switch to different build environments for different packages.


#### channels
If the root account and the user account subscribe to different nix channels, invoking `nix-shell` will usually employ the root's channels.
Circumvent this by altering the `NIX_PATH` environment variable to e.g. `/home/<you>/.nix-defexpr/channels/`.


#### nox
Installing and using `nox` as root can create files (usually a cache of the output of `nix-env -qa`) in `/tmp/` which a future installation by a non-admin user will attempt to read and write to.
Since `root` owns these files, the user will lack the appropriate privileges and thus be unable to use `nox` at all.
Either delete these temporary files or don't use `nox` as root.



## Programming language-specific

#### Common Lisp FFI
When using the foreign function interface in Common Lisp, the usual directories that get searched (`/usr/lib`, `/usr/local/lib`) aren't in use at all.
Instead, you have to set the special variable `cffi:*foreign-library-directories*` to include your `/home/<user>/.nix-profile/lib/`.
Rather than manually add the directory to the search path every time I fire up SBCL, I put this into my `.sbclrc` file so that it gets executed every time I start a REPL:

{% highlight common-lisp %}
(ql:quickload :cffi)
(pushnew #P"/home/daniel/.nix-profile/lib/"
         cffi:*foreign-library-directories*)
{% endhighlight %}

Note that the final `/` matters.
Guess how long it took me to figure out that little tidbit.


#### opam, quicklisp, rvm, pip
Some language-specific package managers, like `opam` for OCaml and `quicklisp` for Common Lisp, seem to work when self-installed.
For Ruby, on the other hand, I haven't had any luck getting `rvm` or `gem` to work from either the manual shell-script installation, or by installing through nix.
Likewise, using `pip` is discouraged, as nix has its own special way of building Python packages and nearly all of the common ones are available from nixpkgs.


#### ipython, python2, python3, jupyter
I installed Python and IPython in a haphazard order and wound up with the slightly annoying issue that IPython would only use Python 3.4, with no way of using Python 2.7.
Installing Python 2.7 and 3.4 first, then installing `ipython` and `ipython3` after fixed this.

Notebooks with `ipython`/`jupyter` are more of a problem.
The notebook functionality of ipython was integrated into its codebase prior to version 3.2.1, but as of version 4.0.0 this has been split into a separate project called [jupyter](http://jupyter.org).
So far, I haven't been able to get `ipython-4.0.0` working with jupyter notebooks.
Instead, I have both the stable and unstable branches of `nixpkgs` in my nix channels, so that I can get the newest software when it works and revert to older versions when it doesn't.
In this case, `ipython-3.2.1` is available from the 15.09 release of NixOS.
